0#TODO Retraiter cette note

1.  **Novice** – a novice learner has little or no experience or background knowledge. As a result, they must adhere to a clear set of rules or guidelines and often need supervision to complete tasks.
2.  **Advanced beginner** – once the novice has learned the basic rules of a skill, they progress to advanced beginner. Here, they begin applying rules to new situations and receive important feedback when they make a mistake. All task attributes and aspects are treated separately and given equal importance, but the individual may be able to complete some tasks unsupervised.
3.  **Competent** – during the competency stage, the learner encounters situations where the rules don’t apply or where it is unclear which rules should be used. This can lead to the individual becoming paralyzed by indecision. Over time, they realize the futility in trying to apply each rule in every situation. They also begin to see their actions in the context of long-term goals through conscious and deliberate planning.
4.  **Proficient** – generally speaking, the proficient individual can select an appropriate course of action for any situation with confidence. This is the point where learning transitions from rule-based to situation-based. Reaching this stage requires many hours of deliberate practice – there is no way to subvert this process.
5.  **Expert** – in the expert stage, action is driven by intuition derived from a deep understanding of the subject matter. Dreyfus said that “_the ability to make more subtle and refined discriminations is what distinguishes the expert from the proficient performer._” To the outside observer, the performance of an expert appears effortless and to some extent, magical. The expert does not rest on his or her laurels. In other words, they must revert to an earlier stage if changes in their field of expertise necessitate new learning.

### Liens
- https://fourweekmba.com/dreyfus-model-of-skill-acquisition/